Southwest. We beat everybody else. There were
dozens and dozens of cities that applied for
those, but they didn't have the process we had in
place. They didn't have the action program. They
didn't have the implementation capability that
this grant, this grant was probably the purest
planning grant I ever saw in my life that was
oriented toward away from politics and toward a
doing philosophy. They came back to us, this
apartment of whatever it was at that time, the
interiors, it was getting folded into something
else. They came back and they asked if they could
use, copy our plan and our program to distribute to
other cities to show them how they wanted it to be
done. In essence, it was the model for parking open
space planning in the Southwest. That reminds me
of what happened many years before in California
when I was with ABAC. We had our regional planning
process in place at the time that the Title VII open
space land grants came into being. And we applied
for them. Our member cities and our counties
applied for them because we had the process in
place. In one calendar year, I was told many years
later by an employee of Interior Bureau of Outdoor
Recreation that we got over half of all the funds
available in the United States in that one count a
year through ABAC. That's great. And they didn't
want people to know that, of course. But there you
go. Well, see, we ought to do a better job of letting
that be known, of these victories. We always think
these grants are political. And they have emerged
more and more so, it seems like. But there are times
when these windows open up and there's true
competition. And the communities that are doing
the planning really reap the benefits from the
wars. I'm trying to get a regional plan process
going in the Brazos Valley now, and I'm having some
problems, of course, because, oh yeah, it's a
tough thing. But if they get it, and then some of
these programs do come along, they'll have
something in place and they can move on it
immediately.
However, now back to Fort Worth. What do you find
you're doing in Fort Worth that might be different
than what you did in Corpus Christi, Galveston,
Beaumont, Arlington? Well, it's completely
different. in the sense that an awful lot of the
planning has already been done. And now what they
really need to do is update it, precise it, put it
into an implementation mode, and then package it
all up into something called a growth management
performance system where everybody understands
it. I'm much more involved in the implementation
making something happen than I am in the planning
to make it happen. You know, we've had a cultural
district since 1918, 1936, and we're now in the
process of trying to make something more happen.
It's evolved naturally down here. It's quite
prestigious, but now we can really use it as a
catalyst to do something else. So it's more into
action planning. We're doing action planning
here. What do you mean by action planning? Well,
more of taking what we've got and saying okay if
this is where we want to be five or ten or twenty
years from now what do we do next year to get there
what are the steps we take tomorrow next week next
month what are some specific things more of a betty
crocker cookbook kind of thing you know break the
egg then do this do that we're more into into the
action planning short-term cost strategic
planning if you want this It's just precising
down, dealing with smaller, more manageable
issues and concerns within the context that's
provided by the overall planning that's gone
before this.
Your views. 99.999%, which I buy 100%. So anyway,
what you're talking about in terms of your action
plans, really you're talking about the short
range rather than the mid-range or the long range.
Yeah, we're putting more emphasis on generating
short-term and repackaging the mid-range and the
long-term. Repackaging them where they kind of
have a fresh look about them and then using that
repackaging process to identify these specific
actionable items that we can deal with in the
short-term to make planning seem more useful,
more current, more important to people in the
decision-making areas. Now, are you going to be
able to achieve annual review of the
comprehensive plan here in Fort Worth like you
have elsewhere? I would be stunned if we couldn't,
in particular because it's going to be seen as part
of a system as opposed to a product. When you
produce a planning product, there's still that
tendency that you've finished it. If you indicate
that it's part of a system and get away from the
process and say, no, it's a system here, People, I
think, understand what systems like that clock.
The clock is always moving. The clock is always
turning. And I think it's going to be very easy for
us in a growth management system to insert these
modules each year as we update these things and as
we pull out these new issues and give them some
prominence in the annual work program. Yeah, if a
comprehensive plan document is viewed as sort of a
periodic pulling together and documentation of
your goals, objectives, and policies, and so
forth, as a part of an ongoing process, and it's
going to have to be done periodically, then I think
you've got it made. And you know, one thing we were
trying to do in Arlington that was completely
different than anywhere else, we were trying to
use the new technologies, the computer age here,
the microcomputers, for the plan. We wanted the
plan, the product that's called the plan, to be on
the computer. We wanted to have it accessible to
everybody in their home. We wanted the developer
to be able to pick up his telephone, plug in his
machine, and look at the plan, the goals, the
objectives. We wanted to be able to update that
plan daily with new statistics, New objectives,
new council policies from that week. Type the
thing in there. Don't worry about the latter time
of the printing. Bang! At the end of the week, it's
in the machine. You can find out what those cities,
what the city's goals and objectives and policies
and proposals are right there. Updated daily, if
not weekly. And Ray is still working on that. I'm
not convinced that Arlington won't have the first
state-of-the-art comprehensive plan because
he's got the knowledge and the technology to make
this jump. We have done a poor, pathetic job of
using the computers in the planning profession.
We still got some people that can use them for
various little elements or something. It's like
someone telling me, well, now I use my calculator.
Hey, the real value of that thing for keeping the
plants current has not been touched upon in any of
the literature I've seen. And that's what
Arlington can do. That's what we were committed to
doing over there. We're going to take a long time
doing it, and I sure as heck was going to do a
state-of-the-art one that was going to be
technologically superior to anybody else. What
do you want to know about the staff? Yeah, what
about the current planning staff? Are you up to
speed in terms of strength and technical
capability and so forth? We're way understaffed
for a city of this size. We do not have the technical
capabilities that a city of this size ought to
have.
We have a very, in terms of overall capability, the
department's very average.
In fact, I'm kind of surprised by the amount of the
averageness. There's a big average, big group in
the middle average. There's a couple way below
average. There's a couple way above average. And I
would have thought the skewing would have been a
little different. That's something I'm
learning. This is the first time I've been in,
somebody might say it's a large city. I'm kind of
surprised that there's not a bigger grouping
above average. There's just a big mass of average.
We could use more, but effectiveness doesn't
depend. This is out of my book here. Effectiveness
doesn't depend on the size of the staff you have. It
depends on making sure you're doing the right
things with the staff that you have. and it means
changing priorities, it means giving up some
things we were doing that were taking a lot of time,
giving up some things we were doing that weren't
taking a lot of time, but just getting rid of them so
that you can concentrate your resources and your
energies in the areas where you ought to be, in the
most protected areas, in the areas with the
biggest visibility, visibility, and in the area
where we can be quote, most effective, unquote.
You've got to put your resources where you can be
effective. You can't be everything to everybody.
In this department, the truth is spread out too
thin. One of the things I've been trying to do is get
us out of certain businesses. We've also been
trying to do more co-producing. an old throwback
to the self-help days of planning, where you use
our technical expertise to advise some citizens
who are informed and educated who didn't do a lot of
the work themselves, allowing us to serve in
almost a consultant role, except allowing us also
to take credit for what comes out of this effort and
put our name on it, our stamp on it. Yes, I wanted to
ask you what the relationship of the department
was now to its citizen base in the community. We
have lost a lot of that citizen base. They bring it
up when they need it. It's almost like when we
recycled the sector plan, we went back out and
resurrected the sector councils. Those councils
have now been neglected and allowed to decay. We
don't provide staff support to most of them. The
newsletters are dropping off now. There's
techniques we can do to maintain those contacts
and to maintain those groups. It's hard for them to
sustain without issues. So we have frittered
away. Frittered? Frittered away. a valuable
resource base out there. Well, do you mean to
reactivate that? My desire is, but I have to do it as
part of the strategy here, that this was a
conscious decision on the part of the prior city
manager and the council to to allow these
institutions to decay, this kind of benign
neglect. Oh, no, we're all for it. But if it's not as
accurate as it used to be, it wouldn't bother us.
Past councils have taken that attitude. Yeah. But
you want to turn that around? Yeah. And to do that,
though, see, I've got to find the selling point
I've got to go back and say and find that glory that
goes with the citizen participation. If we only
update those sector plans every eight years then
nobody, well why sustain the sector councils over
eight years? But if in fact you get into the annual
updating mode then it's obvious that you've got to
have these people in place and they've got to be
informed and educated and you can't come in and
reinvent the wheel each time so you have to have a
sustained presence. That's my strategy, yeah.
And that means staff, staffing. It means some
staff, but it also means taking the staff we have
and putting them over into those areas. And if it's
a product, if we can generate enough new products
out there that the council says we want to see you
doing all of those things, then maybe over time we
get more staff. But the way it is right now, it's
more of a redirect the staff. Staff has never been
the problem. I mean, it's just like with APA,
chapter board of national. Bob, it's not staff,
it's not money. It's doing something with what you
have. It's a bias for action. It's putting your
resources where they can make a difference and
cutting them in areas where it doesn't. See,
National was the same way. I tried to cut the budget
up there, nobody could do it. We couldn't do it.
There's always somebody wanting to protect that
thing. It's the way it is here in city government.
Somebody always wants to protect something out
there. So I tell these people, we're just not
telling anybody we're not doing it. We just quit
doing it. Don't go out there and tell somebody.
Don't confront them. I'm not doing it anymore.
I'll tell the council, we want to cut out this
thing. We just quit doing it. And heck, I got news
for them. Nobody's going to miss it. Yeah. If it's
been ineffective, who's going to care? That's
right. Okay, well, Bruce, good luck in your
relatively new position here. And we will be
watching all of your successes as they appear one
by one in the future. And thank you very much for
your time again. And as I told you at the beginning
of this interview, if you move again to another
city, this is your last interview. Okay. So stay
around a while, please. I'll move here again. It
won't be a big city. It probably won't be in Texas.
I'm going to get out of this planning business here
one of these days, if I'm lucky. Thank you very
much. You're welcome.